---
layout: post
title:  "On the Duality of Operating System Structures"
date:   2018-12-26 12:00:00
categories: paper_response
tags: 
image: /assets/article_images/traffic_circle.jpg
---

At the highest level and the lowest level, there is no difference between thread-based and event-based architecutres.

This is part of a series of responses I'm writing on classical papers in concurrency.

#### [Original paper](http://cgi.di.uoa.gr/~mema/courses/m131/papers/lauer78.pdf) by Hugh Lauer and Roger Needham
#### Published in *Proc. Second International Symposium on Operating Systems Principles* Oct 1978. <br> Reprinted in SIGOPS Operating Systems Review, 13,2, Pages 3-19, April 1979.

## High-Level Overview
* Thread-based systems are effectively equivalent to event-based systems. They are “duals” of one another.

* The most significant aspects of this paper are theoretical. The empirical aspect of it—a demonstration with an experimental OS, the Cambridge CAP Computer—could be described as anecdotal.

* The equivalence shown only holds for what the authors call the “canonical models” of thread- and event-based OSes. The equivalence—-in performance, logic, and even structure—-is a perspective worth considering.


## Review of Technical Aspects

* The writers focused on the ways all OSes use processes, synchronization, and inter-process communication.  
  * By analyzing a large set of OSes, they deduced there were two major approaches to implementing these traits.
  * They call these two approaches the message-driven (or event-driven) model and the procedure-oriented system (or, contemporarily, thread-driven).
  * They conclude that the best model to use should be based on the environment in which the OS is running and not on the software that will be running on the OS.

* Specifically, they claim three types of equivalence.
  * A program constructed strictly with the primitives of one model can be mapped directly into a dual program or subsystem in the other model.
  * The dual programs or subsystems are logically identical to each other. They can also be made textually very similar.
  * The performance of a system build in one model is identical to the same system built with the other model, given identical scheduling strategies.

* A summary of the message-oriented system (event-driven)
  * Processes can send messages, wait for any message, wait for a particular class of messages, and examine the state of the message queue.
  * There are three hallmarks of this model
    * Specific communication paths are established for specific forms of communication between particular pairs of processes.
    * The number of processes and the connections between them remain relatively static.
    * Processes rarely cross protection boundaries (except to enter the Kernel) and they rarely share data in memory.
  * Some best design practices
    * Data structures which must be manipulated by more than one process are passed by reference in messages.
    * Priorities then to be statically assigned to process at the time the system is designed, and they correspond to the timing needs of the resources being managed.
  * Implementation
    * A message typically contains a small, fixed area for data which is passed by value and space for a pointer to larger data structures which must be passed by reference.
    * A message ID is a handle by which a particular massage can be identified.
    * A message channel is an ADT which identifies the destination for a message.
    * A message port is a queue that holds messages of a certain class or type.
    * Each message channel must be bound to a particular message port, but a message port can have more than one message channel bound to it.
  * Because of the serial way in which requests are handled, there is never any need to protect the state information of a process from race conditions.

* A summary of the procedure-oriented system
  * Cooperation among processes is achieved by some form of synchronization primitives.
  * A procedure is a piece of Mesa text containing algorithms, local data, parameters, and results. Sounds like a thread.
  * The asynchronous procedure call mechanism is represented by the `FORK` and `JOIN` statements.
  * A module is the primitive Mesa unit of compilation and consists of a collection of procedures and data.
  * Processes are very lightweight and can be created and destroyed very frequently. Module and monitor instantiation is more cumbersome and is usually done statically.
  * Processes move from one context to another by means of the procedure call facility across module boundaries, and they use asynchronous calls to stimulate concurrent activity. They depend upon monitor locks and condition variables to keep out of the way of each other. Thus no process can be associated with a single address space unless that space is the whole system.

* Proving thesis parts 1 & 2: mapping and interchangeability
  * The exact mapping of operations in the two modes is outlined in the paper, updated in vonBehren et. al. and likely in the slides?
  * The writers acknowledge one could write a program that could not be easily mapped, but they suggest such a program may be “an over-imaginative, ungainly feature which is awkward to program and hard to understand.”

* Proving thesis part 3: performance 
  * Dynamic performance of an OS depends on three components:
    * The execution times of the user programs themselves
    * The computational overhead of the primitive system operations they call
    * The queueing and waiting times which reflect the congestion and sharing of resources
      * Dependence on external events
      * Scheduling decisions
    * Process switching can be made equally fast in either systems, and for similar machine architectures this means saving the same amount of state information.

* For empirical support the authors describe their experience with the Cambridge CAP Computer.
* Underlying Differences Between Styles
  * One may want to chose one style over the other because of the organization fo real and virtual memory, the size of the stateword which must be saved on every context switch, the ease with which scheduling and dispatching can be done the arrangement of peripheral devices and interrupts, and the architecture of the instruction set and the programmable registers.
  * Part of the problem is that the common notion of “process” evokes wildly different implications in the two worlds. 
