---
layout: post
title:  "Implementing Remote Procedure Calls"
date:   2018-12-28 12:00:00
categories: paper_response
tags: 
image: /assets/article_images/phone_schematic.jpg
---

The first paper to describe an implementation of RPCs from packet-level protocols to built-in language support.

This is part of a series of responses I'm writing on classical papers in concurrency.

#### [Original paper](http://www.cs.binghamton.edu/~mlewis/phdexam/ss/papers/birrell84implementing.pdf) by A. D. Birrell and B. J. Nelson
#### Published in *ACM Transactions on Computer Systems*, Vol. 2, No. 1 Febrary 1984.

## High-Level Overview

* This paper discusses the basics of remote procedure calls: a paradigm for providing communication across a network to call procedures represented in other address spaces as if they were written in the callee’s own address space.

* This paper considers the design questions that an RPC system would need to answer and proposes an implementation. It describes a system already implemented built on several substantial components (like Lupine for creating stubs) that are not discussed here. It discusses design and offers a proof of concept. 

* This proceeds Bershad et al.’s discussion of A-Stacks and E-Stacks and efficiency. It just describes how an RPC can work at its most basic level. I found the symmetry of the caller and callee systems interesting. The simplicity is appealing.

## Review of Technical Aspects

* When an RPC is invoked, the calling environment is suspended, the parameters are passed across the network to the environment where the procedure is to execute (the callee) and the desired procedure is executed there. When the procedure finishes and produces its results, the results are passed back to the calling environment, where execution resumes as if returning from a simple single-machine call.

* There are three benefits to this design:
  * The semantics are simple.
  * The communication between systems can take place at network speeds b/c the procedure calls themselves are pretty simple
  * Because distribution of work across computers happens at the level of the procedures, it can be implemented in most procedural code.
* There are a host of design questions to answer before implementing a system. 
* PRC’s and message passing are effectively interchangeable.
  * The writers chose procedure calls because they are the major control and data transfer mechanism imbedded in their major language, Mesa.
* They assume different address spaces because, although a shared address space between multiple computers may be feasible, the research into it had not been done.
* The structure of an RPC includes five parts: the user, the user-stub, the PRC communications package (known here as `RPCRuntime`), the server-stub, and the server. 
  * The user, the user-stub and one instance of `RPCRuntime` execute in the caller machine; the server, the server-stub and another instance of `RPCRuntime` execute in the callee machine. 
  * When the user wishes to make a remote call, it actually makes a perfectly normal local call which invokes a corresponding procedure in the user-stub. 
  * The user-stub is responsible for placing a specification of the target procedure and the arguments into one or more packets and asking the `RPCRuntime` to transmit these reliably to the callee machine. 
  * On receipt of these packets, the `RPCRuntime` in the callee machine passes them to the server-stub. The server-stub unpacks them and again makes a perfectly normal local call, which invokes the appropriate procedure in the server. 
  * Meanwhile, the calling process in the caller machines is suspended awaiting a result packet. When the call in the server completes, it returns to the server-stub and results are passed back to the suspended process in the caller machine. 
  * There they are unpacked and the user-stub returns them to the user.
  * `RPCRuntime` is responsible for retransmissions, acknowledgements, packet routing and encryption.
* Binding is the process of connecting two computers together to facilitate an RPC. It requires two pieces of information: name and location.
  * When writing a distributed application, a programmer first writes an interface module. Then she can write the user code that imports that interface and the server code that exports the interface. She also presents the interface to Lupine, which generates the user-stub and the server-stub. 
  * After designing the interface, she need only write the user and server code. Lupine is responsible for generating the code for packing and unpacking arguments and results and `RPCRuntime` is responsible for packet-level communications.
  * There are two parts to the name of an interface: the type and instance. 
    * For instance, the type of an interface might correspond to the abstraction of a mail server, and the instance would correspond to some particular mail server selected from many.
  * Locations can be the network addresses of the machine with which we wish to communicate, but more information could allow for more efficient run-time binding acorss the network.
    * Grapevine is an intermediary database that provides this additional information. It consists of a set of entries keyed by a character string known as a Grapevine `RName`. There are two varieties of entries: individual and groups. Grapevine keeps several items of information for each database entry, but the PRC package is concerned with only two: for each individual there is a connect-site, which is a network address, and for each group there is a member-list which is a list of `RName`s.
* The writers highlight that importing an interface has no effect on the data structures in the exporting machine. This means if a server crashes, the caller is not left with partially modified data.
  * Also, use of the unique ID scheme means that bindings are implicitly broken if the exporter crashes and restarts (since the currency of the ID is checked on each call). Without this, a user will not be notified of a crash happening between calls. 
* Finally, the authors note that this scheme allows calls to be made only on procedures that have been explicitly exported through the RPC mechanism.
  * The access controls that restrict updates to the Grapevine database have the effect of restricting the set of users who will be able to export particular interface names.
* The semantics of PRCs can be achieved without designing a specialized packet-level protocol.
  * However the particular nature of RPC communication means that there are substantial performance gains available if one designs and implements a transport protocol specially for RPC. 
  * The authors tried to minimize the real time between initiating a call and getting results. With protocols for bulk data transfer this is not important.
* Simple calls
  * To make a call, the caller sends a call packet containing a call identifier, data specifying the desired procedure (as described in connection with binding) and the arguments. 
    * The machine that transmits a packet is responsible for retransmitting it until an acknowledgement is received, in order to compensate for lost packets.
    * The call identifier serves two purposes. It allows the caller to determine that the result packet is truly the result of its current call (not, for example, a delayed result of a precious call) and it allows the callee to eliminate duplicate call packets.
    * If a connection is idle, the server machine may discard its state information after an interval, when there is no longer any danger of receiving retransmitted call packets (say after five minutes) and it can do so without interacting with the caller machine.
  * Note however that the writer rely on the unique ID introduced for remote binding. Without this identifier duplicates would be undetectable if a server crashed and then restarted while a caller was still retransmitting a call packet.
* Complicated calls
  * When the caller is satisfied with its acknowledgements, the caller process waits for the result packet. While waiting, however, the caller periodically sends a probe packet to the callee, which the callee is expected to acknowledge.
    * Note that this will only detect failures in the communication levels: it will not detect if the callee has deadlocked while working on the call.
  * If the arguments or results are too large to fit in a single packet, they are sent in multiple packets with each but the last requesting explicit acknowledgement. Thus when transmitting a large call argument packets are sent alternately by the caller and callee, with the caller sending data packets and the callee responding with acknowledgments. This allows the implementation to use only one packet buffer at each end for the call.
    * For transferring a large amount of data in one direction, the authors’ protocol sends up to twice as many packets as a modern bulk data protocol would send (since it acknowledges each packet).
* Exception handling
  * There are facilities in the protocol to allow the process on the server machine handling a call to transmit an exception packet in place of a result packet.
  * The writers permit the callee machine to communicate only those exception which are defined in the Mesa interface which the callee exported. This simplified their implementation and provides some protection and debugging assistance.
* Use of Processes
  * On the scale of a remote procedure call, process creation and process swaps can amount to a significant cost. 
    * The first step in reducing cost is maintain in each machine a stock of idle server processes willing to handle incoming packets. When a server process is entirely finished with a call, it reverts to its idle state instead of dying.
* Use of Process IDs
  * When the response packet arrives in the caller machine, the interrupt handler there passes it directly to the calling process. The calling process now knows the process identifier of the server process, and can use this in subsequent packets of the call, or when initiating a later call.
  * When the interrupt handler receives an RPC packet, it looks at the destination process identifier. If the corresponding process on this machine is at this time waiting for an RPC packet, then the incoming packet is dispatched directly to that process. Otherwise the packet is dispatched to an idle server process.
