---
layout: post
title:  "'New Beginnings', Portland State's Accelerated CS Post-Bacc Program"
date:   2018-12-28 12:00:00
categories: paper_response
tags: 
image: /assets/article_images/nfa.png
---

A brief summary of my time in the post-baccalaureate program that preceded my time as a grad student at Portland State University. 

#### Why did you decide to pursue Computer Science?

<br>I always knew I wanted to build things, but I didn't know what. In a series of odd jobs in college, I installed solar panels, repaired chemistry lab equipment, did the books for a film festival and generally just wanted to help put together something cool.

With a liberal arts degree and no focused job plans, I started doing the prerequisites for civil engineering, and it was in a statistics class that I wrote code for the first time. Shortly after that I got a job with the city government managing data. I was doing a lot of arcane Excel menu exploration the first few weeks, but then a statistician I was working for showed me that the I could write small programs that would do everything I was otherwise trying to do in Excel--and I was hooked. I felt like a librarian with superpowers, able to transform and store huge quantities of data with explicit, repeatable operations. After a few months on this job, I knew I wanted to write software everyday, and I just needed to learn how.


#### What brought you to PSU's New Beginnings?

<br>I like school, and I wanted to learn a bit about everything that software can do. Pursuing a formal education in the field felt like the right choice. I wasn't planning to go to graduate school quite so soon after undergrad, but the opportunity to start a broad curriculum with a cohort was too good of an opportunity to pass up.


#### Can you describe what it was like transitioning from your previous career to computer science and the impact of New Beginnings?

<br>The biggest difference I've found working as a developer compared to work I did in other fields is the amount of self-education I'm expected to take on for myself. There's generally good support for doing it, but I've had to learn how to teach myself new technical concepts from the ground up.

New Beginning helped with this because some amount of self-teaching was required right out the gate; to fill in the gaps in our individual backgrounds we got good at working together. Working with my cohort was the highlight of New Beginnings for me, and it shaped how I continue to teach myself new material in the field.


#### What are you doing now? (describe any research or projects you're working on if you're still a student)

<br>I interned as a software developer at Janrain and CDK. I developed and led the curriculum for a Python lab in the last two New Beginnings cohorts. I'm currently developing a curriculum for a Haskell lab, and preparing to teach this and operating systems next term.


#### Looking back, what are ways you could have prepared for the NB program?

<br>The preparation that was most helpful to me was having written some code--Udacity at the time had an intro to coding with Python course that several of us had taken, and just at that level it was very helpful. I had learned some basic statistics and probability. That helped me with the math, though I think we were each comfortable with some part of the quantitative work and learned everything we weren't familiar with in the program. 


#### Any additional advice/tips/wisdom you would like to share?

<br>To me New Beginnings is a hybrid of the core academic computer science curriculum and a tech boot camp; you'll see everything essential to moving on to graduate work in the field but in order to work through it at an accelerated pace, you'll need to teach yourself enough to stay afloat in some deep waters until you start swimming. With that, be ready to stare at problems you don't understand and push yourself to find answers. New Beginnings was hard, but it's one of the best academic choices I've made.

A professor once mentioned to me once that potential employers are much more interested in the topics you're passionate about than knowing "you've done all the things we've wanted you to do." 

This perspective of doubling down on the projects I enjoyed has helped shape the way I approach my classes. From this view, the degree is not a race to the finish, but an opportunity to increase your breadth of knowledge through coursework while using the freedom and resources of graduate school to pursue the work that resonates most strongly with you.


